In this video, we're going to continue
our Kotlin tutorials and look at how to
get our code to make decisions. Now we'll
finish up on some variables and then
we'll move on to the basics of classes
and the importance of understanding
those so let's get into that alright so
here we are where we left off at the end
of the previous tutorial now if you
haven't done so already start up Android
studio then use the option to open an
existing Android studio project to open
up the Kotlin tutorial project that we
actually created quite a few videos ago
now what I'm going to do first now is
delete everything in the main function
so that we can type in some new code now
the opening and closing curly braces
must stay but delete everything between
them so I'm gonna show you what I mean
first I'm going to close down the run
window by clicking on it down here
bottom left hand corner I'm going to
select everything essentially from line
to right down here to line 31st the del
button so you need to have that line 1
that stay as it is with the left to
curly brace on the end then the closing
right curly brace on line 3 as well so
I'm going to talk briefly about
conditional processing now the best way
to show you that is to give you an
example now this is something that
you'll be using quite extensively in the course
in fact the ability of the computer to
branch to different bits of code
depending on some condition or other is
one of the things that make programs so
powerful so let's say an example of that
something you may use in a game to check
if the player can continue playing or if
they've used up all their lives so let's
start by declaring and integer types and
give it the value 3 so we're going to
start with Val lives equals 3 now
remember that we don't have to specify
that life's as an INT Kotlin can infer
that because we're giving lives the
value 3 now what if you wanted the
computer to check how many lights the
player has left
if the lights left is 0 printing out a
message to say game over otherwise
printing on a message to say you want
did you so how do we go about that but
we'll start from the next line so
actually we'll start on line 4 and we'll
check to see if the life's is less than
1 so to do that we type if parentheses
lives less than 1 so the less than sign
and the number
right parentheses then we went our left
curly brace which will automatically add
the right curly brace on the next line
that's opening a code block and in there
we're going to type print line
parentheses game over
exclamation mark we've got the double
quote in the in the right parentheses so
we've used the if keyword and that's
followed by a condition to test so in
this case the test is to check for lives
being less than 1 now we could also
check for lives equals 0 there but in a
fantasy world the player could have
fallen foul but really powerful wizard
and lost several lifes in one go so
we're making sure that the game's over
if the number of lifes goes negative as
well so if I run this now you can see we
get no output it doesn't print anything
so the code that we put inside the if
block isn't being executed which is
great because the number of lifes is 3
and the condition here life's less than
1 isn't true so all this code between
the opening curly brace and the closing
curly brace forms a single block of code
and anything we put in there will only
be executed if the condition is true now
we can also tell the computer what to do
with the conditions false by adding an
else clause so let's go ahead and do
that so we're going to type this to the
right of the closing or the right curly
brace else then add another left curly
brace which has a code block and in
there I'm going to type in print 'ln
parentheses double quotes you're still
alive exclamation mark and we're going
to double quote in right parenthesis so
now when I run the code this time we've
got a message printing out you're still
alive which has come from the else block
so that's pretty powerful we can test a
condition and perform one set of actions
if the condition is true and the
different set if it's false now if we
change our lives up here on line two to
zero and run it again you can see that
we've got game over appearing so that's
working fine so it likes is less than 1
this bit of code runs the code that's in
between the left and right curly braces
if life's isn't less than one so if it's
one or above then it goes to this code
in the else block and runs that instead
now without this ability programs would
be pretty basic and could just follow a
sequence of steps but by checking
conditions we can allow the computer to
make decisions and respond in different ways
now conditions like lives less than 1
this one here then evaluates to a type
of valley that's called a boolean so we
can actually store the result of that
condition in a variable and use the
variable in the condition so let's go
ahead and make some changes to that so
I'm going to leave VAR life's equals 0
then on what below that we're going to
put var is game over is equal to
parentheses lives less than 1 and
closing parentheses and then we're going
to put if instead of life less than 1
but then what if is game over and leave
everything else as is so here the
condition is evaluated and the result is
assigned to the variable here is game
over now in the if statement
you saw me change the hard-coded
condition to use the value of the
variable or actually put the variable
name in there so it will use the value
that's stored in the variable so
different bits of code will run
depending on whether it's true or false
so if we run it again now it correctly
says game over and that's because the
life's is set to 0 if I set lives to 3
like here on line 2 and running again we
correctly get the message you're still alive
now you don't have to store the result
of a conditional expression in a
variable but it can be useful if you
want to reuse the result a little bit
later in the code we can also print the
value of boolean variables as well so if
we do something like this on the next
line type print 'ln parenthesis is game
over to print it out we run that I guess
he's printed out the value false
and if I change life's to zero we run it
in our prints the value of true so
that's the boolean type and it's very
useful for storing the state of things
while the program is running all right
so back to our condition and the syntax
of if statements and expressions is they
start with the word if that's followed
by condition in parentheses so we've got
the if here then the condition in
parentheses now our conditions an
expression that evaluates to true or
false so it must be a boolean expression
so next we've got the block of code to
execute if the conditions true that's
the code that's in the left and right
curly braces here in this case print
print Lin game over that's all we need
but we can also include some code to
execute if the condition evaluates to
false we can do that by adding the else
keyword here and adding another code
block and then this code in here will be
executed if the condition is false so
that's a basic if statement but I've
thrown a few jargon words in there so I
think I better explain them firstly a
block of code or a code block is
everything between the opening and
closing curly braces now a block of code
can contain as many lines of code as you
want and can also contain more blocks
now our main function defines a block
this is the code standing on line 1
which is everything from this first left
curly brace right down to the last one
so basically right down there so
everything in between those curly braces
is part of the main function now inside
that we've actually got two more blocks
each one has only got a single line of
code but there's still code blocks and
this is a code of course this first code
block here is if the condition is
evaluated as true and the last code
block is if the condition is evaluated
as false now a statement a statements
sort of equivalent of a sentence in
English so I'd line - we've got an
assignment statement on the left is a
variable declaration Val lives and on
the right we've got an expression now
this is a simple expression just a 0
that evaluates to 0 not surprisingly now
on line four we've got a more complex
expression
less than 1 now that can evaluate to
true or false depending on the value of
lives so statement 4 is also a statement
that contains an expression no
statements don't have to include an
expression and in fact the next line on
five print line is game over is a
statement that just calls the print line
function and then I'll now line 7
through 11 that forms our if statement
so the whole thing the if and the else
all form a single statement so in this
if statement we've got other statements
to calls to print 'ln and this makes the
statement more like a paragraph rather
than a sentence ok so let's look at some
more conditions because because at the
moment we've only seen how to check if
something's less than something else
they're going to comment out all this
code so that it's available if you want
to download my code from the resources
section on this video so I'm going to
select all of that right down to the
closing right curly brace but not the
very last one making sure that the first
line also wasn't commented out and I'm
going to be my command slash or control
slash if you're on our Windows or Linux
machine so I've commented out that code
now go to also add a line of code that I
won't explain just yet but don't worry
about it it's just a way to get input
from the computer's console so I'm gonna
start by typing print 'ln parentheses
how old are you how old are you : in a
space and close off the line with the
double quote and the right two
parentheses then I'm going to type bow
age equals red line parenthesis and two
exclamation marks dot - int in
parentheses we're going to type print
line' parentheses double quote age is a
dollar age so we print a message telling
the user what to do the next line takes
input from the keyboard are converted to
an int to a number in other words now
there's a lot wrong with this but let's
run it first to make sure it works
alright so there's our prompt and we can
type in a number so I'm going to type in
a number like 21 and by the way make
sure that you click into the run window
first otherwise you'll be typing there
into the code editor so know how I click
there first before I started typing
accounts I'm entering the value 21 and
pressing enter we can see age is 21 is
in output so we're getting it printed
out okay now as I said there's a lot
wrong with this there's no error
checking for example so if I run the
program again and this time type in
hello instead of a number then in the
app the application on the program
actually crashes and that's because
hello can't be converted to a valid
number and it crashes with a number
format exception now we have to learn to
walk before we can run so this bit of
code will let us test our program with
different numbers so make sure you any
type of invalid numbers when we run the
program all right so let's see how to
test different conditions in : so I'm
going to add some more code below the
print 'ln so we're going to start with
the bell message : string I'm going to
put if parentheses age is less than 18
and open a code block with the left
curly brace which automatically had the
right one as well then we're gonna type
in that taco bot message equals you're
too young to vote so that's
straightforward and we've seen a
condition the lot similar to that
earlier the codes are starting the text
to the variable message if the number
that was entered in the keyboard on the
keyboard was less than 18 we can also
say test for age being equal to some
value as well so a single equals symbol
was used to assign a value to a variable
so we have to use two symbols to equal
symbols to test for equality so I can do
something along these lines if else if
then parentheses age equals equals are
two equal signs 100 peppering a code
block then we're gonna type message
equals congratulations now we can't get
to see our message yet because Kotlin
won't compile the app if we try to print
message and I'm just going to add the
code to print it though anyway then I'll
show you what I mean so top on this line
now print 'ln
message in parentheses and we're giving
this error message here and if we have a
lookup see what that error message is
variable message must be initialized so
we didn't assign a value to message when
we declared it on line 17 and there's a
path through the program that could
result in it not getting a value so if
the age is less than 18 everything's
fine and if the age is exactly 100 then
message also gets a value but for any
other age message will be undefined and
Kotlin doesn't allow that so in other
words we've accounted for people who are
under 18 and we've accounted for anyone
who's a hundred but what about to
everyone else well we can do that with a
final else statement so we can come up
here to the end of the code block you
know and else open another code block
message equals you can vote and notice
that the error message disappears and
that's because we've accounted for every
one it's a message we'll always have a
value one we can run the program now I'm
going to run that now but if you do
happen to get the error message could
not fall in a load class main Katie
remember to come up to here to build and
click on rebuild project I'll just do
that now anyway even though I haven't
tried to run it then I try running it
now you're getting the prompt there I'm
clicking into the run window you'll
enter a value 25 age of 25 you can vote
now we can add as many conditions as we
need using else followed by another if
as you've seen me do on line 20 over
here that's a more complex if statement
than we've had before and it shows how
to check for equality using the two
equal signs but now before we look at
the other conditions we can test let's
see one an if expression looks like now
we can use it as a statement like we've
got here or as an expression now if it's
an expression we can assign it to a
variable and in fact Android studio is
offering to do that for us
so if we look at the and the if
statement there so notice that if here
is underlined so we click on that we can
see that the tooltip saying assignment
can be lifted out of if and the like
part will actually give us an
to do that I'm gonna click it over here
we're going to choose the option here to
lift assignment out of if now the rest
of evaluating the if expression is
assigned to message as you can see there
so the result by the way is the last
line in each block if a block contains
several lines of code which is often the
case then the last line is the value
that's assigned so that's a more
cotton-like way of writing this F and
you'll often see this form in the code
that we'll be writing
now I say it's more Kotlin like but
that's really only that really only
applies when there are two conditions
and here we've got three and they're 18
equal to 100 and everything else so once
you get to three or more conditions it's
so more usual to use a win statement or
win expression now we're going to be
looking at them later but I mentioned it
now because Android studio is suggesting
that we use one and you can see over
here if I come over here and hover over
that cuz Kate if can be replaced with
wind again we'll be talking more about
wind statements or win expressions later
on but so that you've got this code
available in the resources I'm going to
duplicate the if expression and then
comment out the duplicate now Android
studio makes it easy you can select all
the lines you want to duplicate and use
control D or command D I'm on a Mac to
duplicate the code I'll show you what I
mean I'm just going to select the code
for message up to the including the last
sour brace I'm going to do a more Mac a
command D notice how it's duplicated the
code and then I'm going to do a command
slash to comment out that code I'll just
go down to the next line comment that
out okay if we come over here now select
the F and then click on the light bulb
we can replace if with when and that's
even more readable so each branch now
starts with a condition then the code to
execute comes after the branch arrow now
from none of the conditions match the
else branch is used. Now using when often
results in more readable code especially
when there are a lot of conditions that
may apply and you're gonna be seeing
lots of examples of win so I'm going
stop this video here, but in the next one
we're gonna start looking at classes in
Kotlin. I'll see you in the next video.